[SYCL][FPGA] IO pipe feature implementation (#1073)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/fpga_io_pipes_design.rst

IO pipes design
===============

Requirements
------------
 - Device should be able to distinguish kernel-to-kernel pipes and io pipes;
 - No changes in SYCL pipe specification;
 - IO pipe namings/IDs are provided by a vendor in a separated header, like:
.. code:: cpp
  namespace intelfpga {
    template <unsigned ID>
    struct ethernet_pipe_id {
      static constexpr unsigned id = ID;
    };
    using ethernet_read_pipe =
        cl::sycl::intel::kernel_readable_io_pipe<ethernet_pipe_id<0>, int, 0>;
    using ethernet_write_pipe =
        cl::sycl::intel::kernel_writeable_io_pipe<ethernet_pipe_id<1>, int, 0>;
  }

>   so a user interacts only with vendor-defined pipe objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Thus, the user interacts only with vendor-defined pipe objects.
```

Links
-----
.. _Spec: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/DataFlowPipes/data_flow_pipes.asciidoc 
.. _Interesting comment from Ronan: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/635#discussion_r325851766

Summary
-------
This document describes a design of IO pipes implementation in SYCL compiler.
It includes changes in SYCL library, clang and SPIR-V to LLVM IR translator.
It adds extra attribute '__attribute__((io_pipe_id(ID)))' that generates
metadata, attached to a pipe storage declaration. By this metadata a backend can
recognize IO pipe and distinguish different IO pipes from each other.

There is another notable solution which was proposed by Ronan (see the link
above): don't make any compiler/library changes - just make backend recognizing
IO pipe by demangling it's name. This proposal wasn't picked, because it will
make backend support of the feature more difficult. So far we already have
two devices' backends that supports SYCL_INTEL_data_flow_pipes extension
(Intel FPGA HW and Intel FPGA emulator) and in the future this number may
increase. So efforts put in compiler implementation shall be payed off even

> more.

Reviewer 2: I am not convinced, but since you are doing the work... :-)

clang
-----
Need to implement additional attribute, that possible to attach to pipe storage
declaration. The attribute must accept an integer argument (the pipe ID).
With the attribute applied, clang generates a metadata attached to pipe storage

> declaration, that contatins the IO pipe ID (argument).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
declaration, that contains the IO pipe ID (argument).
```

llvm-spirv translator
---------------------
Need to implement additional decoration, that saves the IO pipe ID information,
that can be collected from a metadata attached to the pipe storage object.

SYCL implementation in headers
------------------------------
Following the spec, we need to add two more classes for pipes:
 - kernel_readable_io_pipe
 - kernel_writeable_io_pipe
with the same member functions and fields as it is already done for pipe class.

The attribute should be attached to a pipe storage declaration in the headers
and it would be looking like:
.. code:: cpp
  static constexpr int32_t ID = name::id;
  static constexpr struct ConstantPipeStorage
  m_Storage __attribute__((io_pipe_id(ID))) = {m_Size, m_Alignment, m_Capacity};

, where 'name' is some class used in pipe type construction, like:
.. code:: cpp
 using pipe_type = pipe<name, dataT, min_capacity>;

When specific io_pipe_def.hpp is included in a user's code 'name::id' returns

> the actaul IO pipe ID that is passed as the attribute's argument and used to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the actual IO pipe ID that is passed as the attribute's argument and used to
```

.. _Interesting comment from Ronan: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/635#discussion_r325851766

Summary
-------
This document describes a design of IO pipes implementation in SYCL compiler.
It includes changes in SYCL library, clang and SPIR-V to LLVM IR translator.
It adds extra attribute '__attribute__((io_pipe_id("access_mode", ID)))' that
generates metadata, attached to a pipe storage declaration. By this metadata a
backend can recognize IO pipe and distinguish different IO pipes from each
other.

There is another notable solution which was proposed by Ronan (see the link
above): don't make any compiler/library changes - just make backends recognizing
IO pipe by demangling its name. This proposal wasn't picked, because it will
make backend support of the feature more difficult. So far we already have
two devices' backends that support SYCL_INTEL_data_flow_pipes extension
(Intel FPGA HW and Intel FPGA emulator) and in the future this number may
increase. So efforts put in compiler implementation shall be payed off even
more.

clang
-----
Need to implement additional attribute, that possible to attach to a pipe

> storage declaration. The attribute shall accept a compiler time known integer

Reviewer 2: compiler time → compile-time

argument (the pipe ID) and a string argument (access mode). With the attribute
applied, clang generates a metadata attached to the pipe storage declaration,
that contains the IO pipe ID and the access mode. The access modes shall be one
of those: "read_only" and "write_only".

llvm-spirv translator
---------------------
Need to implement additional decoration, that saves the IO pipe ID information
and the access mode, that can be collected from the metadata attached to the
pipe storage object.

SYCL implementation in headers
------------------------------
Following the spec, we need to add two more classes for pipes:

>  - kernel_readable_io_pipe

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `kernel_readable_io_pipe`
```

>  - kernel_writeable_io_pipe

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `kernel_writeable_io_pipe`
```

 with the same member functions and fields as it is already done for pipe class.

The attribute shall be attached to pipe storage declarations in the header, so
the implementation shall be looking like:
.. code:: cpp
  static constexpr int32_t ID = name::id;
  static constexpr struct ConstantPipeStorage
  m_Storage __attribute__((io_pipe_id("read_only", ID))) =
      {m_Size, m_Alignment, m_Capacity};

> , where 'name' is some class used in pipe type construction, like:

Reviewer 2: Curious ` ,`

Author: Removed. I remember seeing such constructions in some science books written in Russian (which is for sure not making them grammar-wise correct neither in English nor in my native language), but for some reasons I'm still following this style.

Reviewer 2: From a mathematical point of view, that makes sense! :-)

.. code:: cpp
 using pipe_type = pipe<name, dataT, min_capacity>;

> When specific io_pipe_def.h is included in a user's code, 'name::id' returns

Reviewer 2: It is unclear where `name::id` comes from just by reading the code above

Author: Rephrased

the actual IO pipe ID that is passed as the attribute's argument and used to

> indentify IO pipe in some backend.

Reviewer 2: the IO pipe

"read_only" and "write_only" access modes shall be passed as the attribute's

> arguments accordingly to pipe storage fields of kernel_readable_io_pipe and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
arguments accordingly to pipe storage fields of `kernel_readable_io_pipe` and
```

> kernel_writeable_io_pipe classes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`kernel_writeable_io_pipe classes`.
```
